
In Ukrainian: Алмазна Сутра (translated by Nikita Shevchenko)
The Diamond Sutra
1.  This is what I have heard:
Once, the Buddha was staying at Anathapindika's retreat in the Jeta
Grove near the city of Sravasti, with a gathering of 1250 monks. 
After dressing and making his begging rounds in the city and eating his
one meal, he sat with the monks.
2.  The monk Subhuti paid his respects to the Buddha and asked
a question:  "What should one who wants to travel the Bodhisattva
path keep in mind?"
3.  The Buddha answered,  "A Bodhisattva should keep this
in mind:  All creatures, whether they are born from the womb or hatched
from the egg, whether they transform like butterflies or arise miraculously,
whether they have a body or are purely spirits, whether they are capable
of thought or not capable of thought:  All of these I vow to help
enter nirvana before I rest there myself!
"But keep in mind, Subhuti, that in reality there is no such thing as
an I who helps, and no such thing as an other whom I help.  A Bodhisattva
who does not recognize this reality is no true Bodhisattva!
4.  "A true Bodhisattva takes no pleasure in this act of compassion
and has no interest in appearances.  He simply helps others selflessly.
"Can you measure the east, the west, the north, and the south, Subhuti?"
"No, Lord."
"Neither can you measure the merit of someone who can help others without
thought of himself."
5.  "Subhuti!  Can anyone tell who is a Buddha on the basis
of physical characteristics?"
"No, Lord.  You have taught that Buddhahood is not a matter of

physical characteristics."
"So one who is concerned with appearances will never see the Buddha,
but one is not concerned with appearances may."
6.  Subhuti asked,  "Lord, will there always be people who
understand your message?"
Buddha answered, "Don't doubt it, Subhuti!  There will always
be people who, hearing the message, will adhere to the precepts and practice
our way.  Our message will reach people simply because it is true! 
There will come a time when many will no longer need words, but will be
beyond words.  We must all strive to go beyond the words, because
words can be clung to, and we should not cling to things.  Understand
that the words of the Buddha are like a raft built to cross a river: 
When its purpose is completed, it must be left behind if we are to travel
further!
7.  "So tell me, Subhuti.  Have I taught the ultimate teaching?"
"No, Lord.  The ultimate teaching is not something which can be
taught, because the ultimate teaching is not a thing which can be grasped
or clung to."
8.  The Buddha said, "Tell me, Subhuti.  If someone gave away
a universe full of treasures to help others, would he gain great merit?"
"Yes, Lord.  His merit would be great.  But you have also
taught us that, in order for this act of generosity to be genuine, he would
not have thought of gaining merit.  In fact, he would not have thought
of himself at all!"
The Buddha said, "Now, if someone understands and passes on even four
sentences of my message to another, his generosity is even greater. 
He is not just giving something, he is helping to create future Buddhas!"
9.  "Tell me, Subhuti.  Would someone who is beginning to
understand my message say to himself 'I have accomplished something grand'?"
"No, Lord.  Saying something like that would mean that the beginner
doesn't understand that there is no ego there to take credit for anything
at all!"
"And would someone who is highly advanced in his understanding of my
message say to himself 'I have accomplished something grand'?"
"No, Lord.  Anyone saying such a thing would also be saying that
there is indeed an ego that attains something, and something to attain. 
These are not the thoughts of someone who understands your message.
"Lord, you have said that I have been successful in achieving peace
and freedom from passions.  In fact, I no longer crave the status
of a saint.  If I did, I am sure that you would never have thought
so much of me!"
10.  "Subhuti, If I say, 'Bodhisattvas adorn the heavens,' would
I be speaking the truth?"
"No, Lord.  Adornments are illusions, and illusions have no place
in the heavens."
"And so Bodhisattvas should rid their minds of ego, and cease their
preferences for one odor or another, one sound or another, one sight or
another.  A Bodhisattva should have no attachment or aversion to anything."
The Buddha asked, "Subhuti, if a man had a body as huge as a mountain,
would he be a great man?"
"No, Lord.  Because 'a great man' is only words, and being a great
man is an illusion, created by the belief in ego."
...
13.  Then Subhuti asked the Buddha, "Lord, what shall we call this
sermon?"
The Buddha answered,  "Call it 'The Diamond Sutra on the Perfection
of Wisdom.'  Like a diamond blade, it can cut through all delusion!"
...
14.  Then Subhuti suddenly had a full awareness of the meaning
of the sermon, and was moved to tears.  "Lord, thank you for this
sermon.  Anyone who hears it and understands it with a pure mind will
be moved by it.  Even hundreds of years into the future, its clarity
will be appreciated."
....
32.  "Subhuti, if someone gave away enough treasure to fill a universe,
he would still not gain as much merit as someone who manages to understand
and pass on a few lines of this sermon.
"So what should be on one's mind as one begins the Bodhisattva journey?
"Like a falling star, like a bubble in a stream,
Like a flame in the wind, like frost in the sun,
Like a flash of lightning or a passing dream --
So should you understand the world of the ego."
Subhuti and the rest of the monks were filled with joy at hearing the Buddha's
sermon.


[An interpretation and abridgement based on other translations. 
All errors are mine alone!]
